--- Page 1 ---
Joint Commission International
Accreditation Standards for
Hospitals
Including Standards for Academic Medical Center Hospitals
6th Edition | Effective 1 July 2017

--- Page 2 ---
Section I:
Accreditation Participation
Requirements

--- Page 3 ---
Accreditation Participation Requirements (APR)
Requirement: APR.1
The hospital meets all requirements for timely submissions of data and information to Joint Commission
International (JCI).
Requirement: APR.2
The hospital provides JCI with accurate and complete information throughout all phases of the accreditation
process.
Requirement: APR.3
The hospital reports within 30 days of the effective date of any change(s) in the hospital’s profile (electronic
database) or information provided to JCI via the E-App before and between surveys.
Requirement: APR.4
The hospital permits on-site evaluations of standards and policy compliance or verification of quality and safety
concerns, reports, or regulatory authority sanctions at the discretion of JCI.
Requirement: APR.5
The hospital allows JCI to request (from the hospital or outside agency) and review an original or authenticated
copy of the results and reports of external evaluations from publicly recognized bodies.
Requirement: APR.6
Currently not in effect.
Requirement: APR.7
The hospital selects and uses measures as part of its quality improvement measurement system.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Requirement: APR.8
The hospital accurately represents its accreditation status and the programs and services to which JCI
accreditation applies. Only hospitals with current JCI accreditation may display the Gold Seal.
Requirement: APR.9
Any individual hospital staff member (clinical or administrative) can report concerns about patient safety and
quality of care to JCI without retaliatory action from the hospital.
To support this culture of safety, the hospital must communicate to staff that such reporting is permitted. In
addition, the hospital must make it clear to staff that no formal disciplinary actions (for example, demotions,
reassignments, or change in working conditions or hours) or informal punitive actions (for example,
harassment, isolation, or abuse) will be threatened or carried out in retaliation for reporting concerns to JCI.
Requirement: APR.10
Translation and interpretation services arranged by the hospital for an accreditation survey and any related
activities are provided by qualified translation and interpretation professionals who have no relationship to the
hospital.
Qualified translators and interpreters provide to the hospital and JCI documentation of their experience in
translation and interpretation. The documentation may include, but is not limited to, the following:
• Evidence of advanced education in English and in the language of the host hospital
• Evidence of translation and interpretation experience, preferably in the medical field
• Evidence of employment as a professional translator or interpreter, preferably full-time
• Evidence of continuing education in translation and interpretation, preferably in the medical field
• Membership(s) in professional translation and interpretation associations
• Translation and interpretation proficiency testing results, when applicable
• Translation and interpretation certifications, when applicable
• Other relevant translation and interpretation credentials
In some cases, JCI can provide organizations with a list of translators and interpreters that meet the
requirements listed above.
Requirement: APR.11
The hospital notifies the public it serves about how to contact its hospital management and JCI to report
concerns about patient safety and quality of care.
Methods of notice may include, but are not limited to, distribution of information about JCI, including
contact information in published materials such as brochures and/or posting this information on the hospital’s
website.
The following link is provided to report a patient safety or quality of care concern to JCI:
http://www.jointcommissioninternational.org/contact-us/report-a-quality-and-safety-issue/.
Hospitals seeking initial accreditation should be prepared to discuss their plan on how compliance with this
APR will be achieved once accredited.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Requirement: APR.12
The hospital provides patient care in an environment that poses no risk of an immediate threat to patient
safety, public health, or staff safety.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Section II:
Patient-Centered
Standards

--- Page 7 ---
International Patient
Safety Goals (IPSG)
Standards
Goal 1: Identify Patients Correctly
IPSG.1 The hospital develops and implements a process to improve accuracy of patient identifications. 𝖯
Goal 2: Improve Effective Communication
IPSG.2 The hospital develops and implements a process to improve the effectiveness of verbal and/or
telephone communication among caregivers. 𝖯
IPSG.2.1 The hospital develops and implements a process for reporting critical results of
diagnostic tests. 𝖯
IPSG.2.2 The hospital develops and implements a process for handover communication. 𝖯
Goal 3: Improve the Safety of High-Alert Medications.
IPSG.3 The hospital develops and implements a process to improve the safety of high-alert medications. 𝖯
IPSG.3.1 The hospital develops and implements a process to manage the safe use of
concentrated electrolytes. 𝖯
Goal 4: Ensure Safe Surgery
IPSG.4 The hospital develops and implements a process for the preoperative verification and surgical/
invasive procedure site-marking. 𝖯
IPSG.4.1 The hospital develops and implements a process for the time-out that is performed
immediately prior to the start of the surgical/invasive procedure and the sign out that
is conducted after the procedure. 𝖯
Goal 5: Reduce the Risk of Health Care-Associated Infections
IPSG.5 The hospital adopts and implements evidence-based hand-hygiene guidelines to reduce the risk of
health care–associated infections. 𝖯
Goal 6: Reduce the Risk of Patient Harm Resulting from Falls
IPSG.6 The hospital develops and implements a process to reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from
falls for the inpatient population. 𝖯
IPSG.6.1 The hospital develops and implements a process to reduce the risk of patient harm
resulting from falls for the outpatient population. 𝖯
7

--- Page 8 ---
Access to Care and
Continuity of Care
(ACC)
Standards
Screening for Admission to the Hospital
ACC.1 Patients who may be admitted to the hospital or who seek outpatient services are screened to
identify if their health care needs match the hospital’s mission and resources. 𝖯
ACC.1.1 Patients with emergent, urgent, or immediate needs are given priority for assessment
and treatment.
ACC.1.2 The hospital considers the clinical needs of patients and informs patients when there
are unusual delays for diagnostic and/or treatment services. 𝖯
Admission to the Hospital
ACC.2 The hospital has a process for admitting inpatients and for registering outpatients. 𝖯
ACC.2.1 Patient needs for preventive, palliative, curative, and rehabilitative services are
prioritized based on the patient’s condition at the time of admission as an inpatient to
the hospital.
ACC.2.2 At admission as an inpatient, the patient and family receive education and orientation
to the inpatient ward, information on the proposed care and any expected costs for
care, and the expected outcomes of care.
ACC.2.2.1 The hospital develops a process to manage the flow of patients
throughout the hospital. 𝖯
ACC.2.3 Admission to departments/wards providing intensive or specialized services is
determined by established criteria. 𝖯
ACC.2.3.1 Discharge from departments/wards providing intensive or specialized
services is determined by established criteria. 𝖯
Continuity of Care
ACC.3 The hospital designs and carries out processes to provide continuity of patient care services in the
hospital and coordination among health care practitioners. 𝖯
ACC.3.1 During all phases of inpatient care, there is a qualified individual identified as
responsible for the patient’s care. 𝖯
ACC.3.2 Information related to the patient’s care is transferred with the patient.
Discharge, Referral, and Follow-Up
ACC.4 There is a process for the referral or discharge of patients that is based on the patient’s health status
and the need for continuing care or services. 𝖯
8

--- Page 9 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
ACC.4.1 Patient and family education and instruction are related to the patient’s continuing
care needs.
ACC.4.2 The hospital cooperates with health care practitioners and outside agencies to ensure
timely referrals.
ACC.4.3 The complete discharge summary is prepared for all inpatients.
ACC.4.3.1 Patient education and follow-up instructions are given in a form and
language the patient can understand.
ACC.4.3.2 The medical records of inpatients contain a copy of the discharge
summary. 𝖯
ACC.4.4 The records of outpatients requiring complex care or with complex diagnoses contain
profiles of the medical care and are made available to health care practitioners
providing care to those patients. 𝖯
ACC.4.5 The hospital has a process for the management and follow-up of patients who notify
hospital staff that they intend to leave against medical advice.
ACC.4.5.1 The hospital has a process for the management of patients who leave the
hospital against medical advice without notifying hospital staff.
Transfer of Patients
ACC.5 Patients are transferred to other organizations based on status, the need to meet their continuing
care needs, and the ability of the receiving organization to meet patients’ needs.
ACC.5.1 The referring hospital develops a transfer process to ensure that patients are transferred
safely.
ACC.5.2 The receiving organization is given a written summary of the patient’s clinical
condition and the interventions provided by the referring hospital.
ACC.5.3 The transfer process is documented in the patient’s medical record. 𝖯
Transportation
ACC.6 The hospital’s transportation services comply with relevant laws and regulations and meet
requirements for quality and safe transport. 𝖯
9

--- Page 10 ---
Patient and Family
Rights (PFR)
Standards
PFR.1 The hospital is responsible for providing processes that support patients’ and families’ rights during
care. 𝖯
PFR.1.1 The hospital seeks to reduce physical, language, cultural, and other barriers to access
and delivery of services.
PFR.1.2 The hospital provides care that supports patient dignity, is respectful of the patient’s
personal values and beliefs, and responds to requests for spiritual and religious
observance.
PFR.1.3 The patient’s rights to privacy and confidentiality of care and information are
respected. 𝖯
PFR.1.4 The hospital takes measures to protect patients’ possessions from theft or loss.
PFR.1.5 Patients are protected from physical assault, and populations at risk are identified and
protected from additional vulnerabilities.
PFR.2 Patients are informed about all aspects of their medical care and treatment and participate in care
and treatment decisions. 𝖯
PFR.2.1 The hospital informs patients and families about their rights and responsibilities to
refuse or discontinue treatment, withhold resuscitative services, and forgo or withdraw
life-sustaining treatments. 𝖯
PFR.2.2 The hospital supports the patient’s right to assessment and management of pain and
respectful compassionate care at the end of life.
PFR.3 The hospital informs patients and families about its process to receive and to act on complaints,
conflicts, and differences of opinion about patient care and the patient’s right to participate in these
processes. 𝖯
PFR.4 All patients are informed about their rights and responsibilities in a manner and language they can
understand.
General Consent
PFR.5 General consent for treatment, if obtained when a patient is admitted as an inpatient or is registered
for the first time as an outpatient, is clear in its scope and limits. 𝖯
Informed Consent
PFR.5.1 Patient informed consent is obtained through a process defined by the hospital and
carried out by trained staff in a manner and language the patient can understand. 𝖯
10

--- Page 11 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
PFR.5.2 Informed consent is obtained before surgery, anesthesia, procedural sedation, use of
blood and blood products, and other high-risk treatments and procedures. 𝖯
PFR.5.3 Patients and families receive adequate information about the patient’s condition,
proposed treatment(s) or procedure(s), and health care practitioners so that they can
grant consent and make care decisions.
PFR.5.4 The hospital establishes a process, within the context of existing law and culture, for
when others can grant consent.
Organ and Tissue Donation
PFR.6 The hospital informs patients and families about how to choose to donate organs and other tissues.
PFR.6.1 The hospital provides oversight for the process of organ and tissue procurement. 𝖯
11

--- Page 12 ---
Assessment of
Patients (AOP)
Standards
AOP.1 All patients cared for by the hospital have their health care needs identified through an assessment
process that has been defined by the hospital. 𝖯
AOP.1.1 Each patient’s initial assessment includes a physical examination and health history as
well as an evaluation of psychological, spiritual/cultural (as appropriate), social, and
economic factors.
AOP.1.2 The patient’s medical and nursing needs are identified from the initial assessments,
which are completed and documented in the medical record within the first 24 hours
after admission as an inpatient or earlier as indicated by the patient’s condition. 𝖯
AOP.1.2.1 The initial medical and nursing assessments of emergency patients are
based on their needs and conditions. 𝖯
AOP.1.3 The hospital has a process for accepting initial medical assessments conducted in a
physician’s private office or other outpatient setting prior to admission or outpatient
procedure.
AOP.1.3.1 A preoperative medical assessment is documented before anesthesia
or surgical treatment and includes the patient’s medical, physical,
psychological, social, economic, and discharge needs.
AOP.1.4 Patients are screened for nutritional status, functional needs, and other special needs
and are referred for further assessment and treatment when necessary.
AOP.1.5 All inpatients and outpatients are screened for pain and assessed when pain is present.
AOP.1.6 Individualized medical and nursing initial assessments are performed for special
populations cared for by the hospital. 𝖯
AOP.1.7 Dying patients and their families are assessed and reassessed according to their
individualized needs.
AOP.1.8 The initial assessment includes determining the need for discharge planning. 𝖯
AOP.2 All patients are reassessed at intervals based on their condition and treatment to determine their
response to treatment and to plan for continued treatment or discharge. 𝖯
AOP.3 Qualified individuals conduct the assessments and reassessments. 𝖯
AOP.4 Medical, nursing, and other individuals and services responsible for patient care collaborate to
analyze and integrate patient assessments and prioritize the most urgent/important patient care
needs.
12

--- Page 13 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Laboratory Services
AOP.5 Laboratory services are available to meet patient needs, and all such services meet applicable local
and national standards, laws, and regulations.
AOP.5.1 A qualified individual(s) is responsible for managing the clinical laboratory service or
pathology service. 𝖯
AOP.5.1.1 A qualified individual is responsible for the oversight and supervision of
the point-of-care testing program. 𝖯
AOP.5.2 All laboratory staff have the required education, training, qualifications, and
experience to administer and perform the tests and interpret the results.
AOP.5.3 A laboratory safety program is in place, followed, and documented, and compliance
with the facility management and infection control programs is maintained. 𝖯
AOP.5.3.1 The laboratory uses a coordinated process to reduce the risks of
infection as a result of exposure to infectious diseases and biohazardous
materials and waste. 𝖯
AOP.5.4 Laboratory results are available in a timely way as defined by the hospital. 𝖯
AOP.5.5 All equipment used for laboratory testing is regularly inspected, maintained, and
calibrated, and appropriate records are maintained for these activities. 𝖯
AOP.5.6 Essential reagents and supplies are available and all reagents are evaluated to ensure
accuracy and precision of results. 𝖯
AOP.5.7 Procedures for collecting, identifying, handling, safely transporting, and disposing of
specimens are established and implemented. 𝖯
AOP.5.8 Established norms and ranges are used to interpret and to report clinical laboratory
results.
AOP.5.9 Quality control procedures for laboratory services are in place, followed, and
documented. 𝖯
AOP.5.9.1 There is a process for proficiency testing of laboratory services. 𝖯
AOP.5.10 Reference/contract laboratories used by the hospital are licensed and accredited or
certified by a recognized authority.
AOP.5.10.1 The hospital identifies measures for monitoring the quality of the
services to be provided by the reference/contract laboratory.
Blood Bank and/or Transfusion Services
AOP.5.11 A qualified individual is responsible for blood bank and/or transfusion services and
ensures that services adhere to laws and regulations and recognized standards of
practice. 𝖯
Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging Services
AOP.6 Radiology and diagnostic imaging services are available to meet patient needs, and all such services
meet applicable local and national standards, laws, and regulations.
AOP.6.1 A qualified individual(s) is responsible for managing the radiology and diagnostic
imaging services. 𝖯
AOP.6.2 Individuals with proper qualifications and experience perform diagnostic imaging
studies, interpret the results, and report the results.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
AOP.6.3 A radiation safety program for staff and patients is in place, followed, and
documented; and compliance with the facility management and infection control
programs is maintained. 𝖯
AOP.6.4 Radiology and diagnostic imaging study results are available in a timely way as defined
by the hospital. 𝖯
AOP.6.5 All equipment used to conduct radiology and diagnostic imaging studies is regularly
inspected, maintained, and calibrated, and appropriate records are maintained for
these activities. 𝖯
AOP.6.6 X-ray film and the required supplies are available when the hospital uses film X-ray.
AOP.6.7 Quality control procedures are in place, followed, validated, and documented. 𝖯
AOP.6.8 The hospital regularly reviews quality control results for all outside contracted sources
of diagnostic services.
14

--- Page 15 ---
Care of Patients (COP)
Standards
Care Delivery for All Patients
COP.1 Uniform care of all patients is provided and follows applicable laws and regulations. 𝖯
COP.2 There is a process to integrate and to coordinate the care provided to each patient.
COP.2.1 An individualized plan of care is developed and documented for each patient.
COP.2.2 The hospital develops and implements a uniform process for prescribing patient
orders. 𝖯
COP.2.3 Clinical and diagnostic procedures and treatments are carried out and documented as
ordered, and the results or outcomes, are recorded in the patient’s medical record.
Care of High-Risk Patients and Provision of High-Risk Services
COP.3 The care of high-risk patients and the provision of high-risk services are guided by professional
practice guidelines, laws, and regulations. 𝖯
Recognition of Changes to Patient Condition
COP.3.1 Clinical staff are trained to recognize and respond to changes in a patient’s condition.
Resuscitation Services
COP.3.2 Resuscitation services are available throughout the hospital.
COP.3.3 Clinical guidelines and procedures are established and implemented for the handling,
use, and administration of blood and blood products. 𝖯
Food and Nutrition Therapy
COP.4 A variety of food choices, appropriate for the patient’s nutritional status and consistent with his or
her clinical care, is available.
COP.5 Patients at nutrition risk receive nutrition therapy.
Pain Management
COP.6 Patients are supported in managing pain effectively. 𝖯
End-of-Life Care
COP.7 The hospital provides end-of-life care for the dying patient that addresses the needs of the patient
and family and optimizes the patient’s comfort and dignity.
Hospitals Providing Organ and/or Tissue Transplant Services
COP.8 The hospital’s leadership provides resources to support the organ/tissue transplant program.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
COP.8.1 A qualified transplant program leader is responsible for the transplant program.
COP.8.2 The transplant program includes a multidisciplinary team that consists of people with
expertise in the relevant organ-specific transplant programs.
COP.8.3 There is a designated coordination mechanism for all transplant activities that involves
physicians, nurses, and other health care practitioners.
COP.8.4 The transplant program uses organ-specific transplant clinical eligibility, psychological,
and social suitability criteria for transplant candidates.
COP.8.5 The transplant program obtains informed consent specific to organ transplantation
from the transplant candidate. 𝖯
COP.8.6 The transplant program has documented protocols, clinical practice guidelines, or
procedures for organ recovery and organ receipt to ensure the compatibility, safety,
efficacy, and quality of human cells, tissues, and organs for transplantation. 𝖯
COP.8.7 Individualized patient care plans guide the care of transplant patients.
Transplant Programs Using Living Donor Organs
COP.9 Transplant programs that perform living donor transplantation adhere to local and regional laws
and regulation and protect the rights of prospective or actual living donors.
COP.9.1 Transplant programs performing living donor transplants obtain informed consent
specific to organ donation from the prospective living donor. 𝖯
COP.9.2 Transplant programs that perform living donor transplants use clinical and
psychological selection criteria to determine the suitability of potential living donors.
COP.9.3 Individualized patient care plans guide the care of living donors.
16

--- Page 17 ---
Anesthesia and
Surgical Care (ASC)
Standards
Organization and Management
ASC.1 Sedation and anesthesia services are available to meet patient needs, and all such services meet
professional standards and applicable local and national standards, laws, and regulations.
ASC.2 A qualified individual(s) is responsible for managing the sedation and anesthesia services.
Sedation Care
ASC.3 The administration of procedural sedation is standardized throughout the hospital. 𝖯
ASC.3.1 Practitioners responsible for procedural sedation and individuals responsible for
monitoring patients receiving procedural sedation are qualified. 𝖯
ASC.3.2 Procedural sedation is administered and monitored according to professional practice
guidelines. 𝖯
ASC.3.3 The risks, benefits, and alternatives related to procedural sedation are discussed with
the patient, his or her family, or those who make decisions for the patient.
Anesthesia Care
ASC.4 A qualified individual conducts a preanesthesia assessment and preinduction assessment.
ASC.5 Each patient’s anesthesia care is planned and documented, and the anesthesia and technique used
are documented in the patient’s medical record.
ASC.5.1 The risks, benefits, and alternatives related to anesthesia and post-operative pain
control are discussed with the patient and/or those who make decisions for the patient.
ASC.6 Each patient’s physiological status during anesthesia and surgery is monitored according to
professional practice guidelines and documented in the patient’s medical record. 𝖯
ASC.6.1 Each patient’s postanesthesia status is monitored and documented, and the patient
is discharged from the recovery area by a qualified individual or by using established
criteria. 𝖯
Surgical Care
ASC.7 Each patient’s surgical care is planned and documented based on the results of the assessment.
ASC.7.1 The risks, benefits, and alternatives are discussed with the patient and his or her family
or those who make decisions for the patient.
ASC.7.2 Information about the surgical procedure is documented in the patient’s medical
record to facilitate continuing care.
ASC.7.3 Patient care after surgery is planned and documented.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
ASC.7.4 Surgical care that includes the implanting of a medical device is planned with special
consideration of how standard processes and procedures must be modified. 𝖯
18

--- Page 19 ---
Medication Management
and Use (MMU)
Standards
Organization and Management
MMU.1 Medication use in the hospital is organized to meet patient needs, complies with applicable laws
and regulations, and is under the direction and supervision of a licensed pharmacist or other
qualified professional. 𝖯
MMU.1.1 The hospital develops and implements a program for the prudent use of antibiotics
based on the principle of antibiotic stewardship. 𝖯
Selection and Procurement
MMU.2 Medications for prescribing or ordering are stocked, and there is a process for medications not
stocked or normally available to the hospital or for times when the pharmacy is closed. 𝖯
MMU.2.1 There is a method for overseeing the hospital’s medication list and medication use.
Storage
MMU.3 Medications are properly and safely stored. 𝖯
MMU.3.1 There is a process for the management of medications and nutritional products that
require special handling. 𝖯
MMU.3.2 Emergency medications are available, uniformly stored, monitored, and secure when
stored out of the pharmacy. 𝖯
MMU.3.3 The hospital has a medication recall system. 𝖯
Ordering and Transcribing
MMU.4 Prescribing, ordering, and transcribing are guided by policies and procedures. 𝖯
MMU.4.1 The hospital defines the elements of a complete order or prescription. 𝖯
MMU.4.2 The hospital identifies those qualified individuals permitted to prescribe or to order
medications.
MMU.4.3 Medications prescribed and administered are written in the patient’s medical record.
Preparing and Dispensing
MMU.5 Medications are prepared and dispensed in a safe and clean environment.
MMU.5.1 Medication prescriptions or orders are reviewed for appropriateness. 𝖯
MMU.5.2 A system is used to safely dispense medications in the right dose to the right patient at
the right time.
19

--- Page 20 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Administration
MMU.6 The hospital identifies those qualified individuals permitted to administer medications.
MMU.6.1 Medication administration includes a process to verify the medication is correct based
on the medication prescription or order.
MMU.6.2 Policies and procedures govern medications brought into the hospital for patient self-
administration or as samples. 𝖯
Monitoring
MMU.7 Medication effects on patients are monitored. 𝖯
MMU.7.1 The hospital establishes and implements a process for reporting and acting on
medication errors and near misses. 𝖯
20

--- Page 21 ---
Patient and Family
Education (PFE)
Standards
PFE.1 The hospital provides education that supports patient and family participation in care decisions and
care processes.
PFE.2 Each patient’s educational needs are assessed and recorded in his or her medical record.
PFE.2.1 The patient’s and family’s ability to learn and willingness to learn are assessed.
PFE.3 Education methods take into account the patient’s and family’s values and preferences and allow
sufficient interaction among the patient, family, and staff for learning to occur.
PFE.4 Health care practitioners caring for the patient collaborate to provide education.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Section III:
Health Care Organization
Management Standards
sdradnatS
tnemeganaM
noitazinagrO
eraC
htlaeH
:III
noitceS

--- Page 23 ---
Quality Improvement
and Patient Safety
(QPS)
Standards
Management of Quality and Patient Safety Activities
QPS.1 A qualified individual guides the implementation of the hospital’s program for quality improvement
and patient safety and manages the activities needed to carry out an effective program of continuous
quality improvement and patient safety within the hospital. 𝖯
Measure Selection and Data Collection
QPS.2 Quality and patient safety program staff support the measure selection process throughout the
hospital and provide coordination and integration of measurement activities throughout the
hospital.
QPS.3 The quality and patient safety program uses current scientific and other information to support
patient care, health professional education, clinical research, and management.
Analysis and Validation of Measurement Data
QPS.4 The quality and patient safety program includes the aggregation and analysis of data to support
patient care, hospital management, and the quality management program and participation in
external databases.
QPS.4.1 Individuals with appropriate experience, knowledge, and skills systematically aggregate
and analyze data in the hospital.
QPS.5 The data analysis process includes at least one determination per year of the impact of hospitalwide
priority improvements on cost and efficiency.
QPS.6 The hospital uses an internal process to validate data. 𝖯
QPS.7 The hospital uses a defined process for identifying and managing sentinel events. 𝖯
QPS.8 Data are always analyzed when undesirable trends and variation are evident from the data. 𝖯
QPS.9 The organization uses a defined process for the identification and analysis of near-miss events.
Gaining and Sustaining Improvement
QPS.10 Improvement in quality and safety is achieved and sustained.
QPS.11 An ongoing program of risk management is used to identify and to proactively reduce unanticipated
adverse events and other safety risks to patients and staff. 𝖯
23

--- Page 24 ---
Prevention and Control
of Infections (PCI)
Standards
Responsibilities
PCI.1 One or more individuals oversee all infection prevention and control activities. This individual(s) is
qualified in infection prevention and control practices through education, training, experience, or
certification.
PCI.2 There is a designated coordination mechanism for all infection prevention and control activities that
involves physicians, nurses, and others based on the size and complexity of the hospital.
Resources
PCI.3 The infection prevention and control program is based on current scientific knowledge, accepted
practice guidelines, applicable laws and regulations, and standards for sanitation and cleanliness.
PCI.4 Hospital leadership provides resources to support the infection prevention and control program.
Goals of the Infection Control Program
PCI.5 The hospital designs and implements a comprehensive infection control program that identifies the
procedures and processes associated with the risk of infection and implements strategies to reduce
infection risk. 𝖯
PCI.6 The hospital uses a risk-based approach in establishing the focus of the health care–associated
infection prevention and reduction program. 𝖯
PCI.6.1 The hospital tracks infection risks, infection rates, and trends in health care–associated
infections to reduce the risks of those infections.
Medical Equipment, Devices, and Supplies
PCI.7 The hospital reduces the risk of infections associated with medical/surgical equipment, devices, and
supplies by ensuring adequate cleaning, disinfection, sterilization, and storage; and implements a
process for managing expired supplies. 𝖯
PCI.7.1 The hospital identifies and implements a process for managing the reuse of single-use
devices consistent with regional and local laws and regulations. 𝖯
Infectious Waste
PCI.7.2 The hospital reduces the risk of infections through proper disposal of waste.
PCI.7.3 The hospital implements practices for safe handling and disposal of sharps and
needles. 𝖯
24

--- Page 25 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Food Services
PCI.7.4 The hospital reduces the risk of infections associated with the operations of food
services.
Construction Risks
PCI.7.5 The hospital reduces the risk of infection in the facility associated with mechanical and
engineering controls and during demolition, construction, and renovation.
Transmission of Infections
PCI.8 The hospital provides barrier precautions and isolation procedures that protect patients, visitors,
and staff from communicable diseases and protects immunosuppressed patients from acquiring
infections to which they are uniquely prone. 𝖯
PCI.8.1 The hospital develops and implements a process to manage a sudden influx of patients
with airborne infections and when negative-pressure rooms are not available. 𝖯
PCI.8.2 The hospital develops, implements, and tests an emergency preparedness program to
respond to the presentation of global communicable diseases. 𝖯
PCI.9 Gloves, masks, eye protection, other protective equipment, soap, and disinfectants are available and
used correctly when required. 𝖯
Quality Improvement and Program Education
PCI.10 The infection prevention and control process is integrated with the hospital’s overall program for
quality improvement and patient safety, using measures that are epidemiologically important to the
hospital.
PCI.11 The hospital provides education on infection prevention and control practices to staff, physicians,
patients, families, and other caregivers when indicated by their involvement in care. 𝖯
25

--- Page 26 ---
Governance,
Leadership, and
Direction (GLD)
Standards
Governance of the Hospital
GLD.1 The structure and authority of the hospital’s governing entity are described in bylaws, policies and
procedures, or similar documents. 𝖯
GLD.1.1 The operational responsibilities and accountabilities of the governing entity are
described in a written document(s). 𝖯
GLD.1.2 The governing entity approves the hospital’s program for quality and patient safety and
regularly receives and acts on reports of the quality and patient safety program. 𝖯
Chief Executive(s) Accountabilities
GLD.2 A chief executive(s) is responsible for operating the hospital and complying with applicable laws and
regulations. 𝖯
Hospital Leadership Accountabilities
GLD.3 Hospital leadership is identified and is collectively responsible for defining the hospital’s mission
and creating the programs and policies needed to fulfill the mission.
GLD.3.1 Hospital leadership identifies and plans for the type of clinical services required to
meet the needs of the patients served by the hospital. 𝖯
GLD.3.2 Hospital leadership ensures effective communication throughout the hospital. 𝖯
GLD.3.3 Hospital leadership ensures that there are uniform programs for the recruitment,
retention, development, and continuing education of all staff.
Hospital Leadership for Quality and Patient Safety
GLD.4 Hospital leadership plans, develops, and implements a quality improvement and patient safety
program.
GLD.4.1 Hospital leadership communicates quality improvement and patient safety
information to the governing entity and hospital staff on a regular basis.
GLD.5 The chief executive and hospital leadership prioritize which hospitalwide processes will be measured,
which hospitalwide improvement and patient safety activities will be implemented, and how success
of these hospitalwide efforts will be measured.
Hospital Leadership for Contracts
GLD.6 Hospital leadership is accountable for the review, selection, and monitoring of clinical or
nonclinical contracts. 𝖯
26

--- Page 27 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
GLD.6.1 Hospital leadership ensures that contracts and other arrangements are included as part
of the hospital’s quality improvement and patient safety program.
GLD.6.2 Hospital leadership ensures that independent practitioners not employed by the
hospital have the right credentials and are privileged for the services provided to the
hospital’s patients. 𝖯
Hospital Leadership for Resource Decisions
GLD.7 Hospital leadership makes decisions related to the purchase or use of resources—human and
technical—with an understanding of the quality and safety implications of those decisions.
GLD.7.1 Hospital leadership seeks and uses data and information on the safety of the supply
chain to protect patients and staff from unstable, contaminated, defective, and
counterfeit supplies.
Clinical Staff Organization and Accountabilities
GLD.8 Medical, nursing, and other leaders of departments and clinical services plan and implement a
professional staff structure to support their responsibilities and authority. 𝖯
Direction of Hospital Departments and Services
GLD.9 One or more qualified individuals provide direction for each department or service in the hospital.
𝖯
GLD.10 Each department/service leader identifies, in writing, the services to be provided by the department,
and integrates or coordinates those services with the services of other departments. 𝖯
GLD.11 Department/service leaders improve quality and patient safety by participating in hospitalwide
improvement priorities and in monitoring and improving patient care specific to the department/
service.
GLD.11.1 Measures selected by the department/service leaders that are applicable to evaluating
the performance of physicians, nurses, and other professional staff participating in the
clinical care processes, are used in the staff’s performance evaluation.
GLD.11.2 Department/service leaders select and implement clinical practice guidelines, and
related clinical pathways, and/or clinical protocols, to guide clinical care. 𝖯
Organizational and Clinical Ethics
GLD.12 Hospital leadership establishes a framework for ethical management that promotes a culture of
ethical practices and decision making to ensure that patient care is provided within business,
financial, ethical, and legal norms and protects patients and their rights. 𝖯
GLD.12.1 The hospital’s framework for ethical management addresses operational and business
issues, including marketing, admissions, transfer, discharge, and disclosure of
ownership and any business and professional conflicts that may not be in patients’ best
interests. 𝖯
GLD.12.2 The hospital’s framework for ethical management addresses ethical issues and decision
making in clinical care. 𝖯
GLD.13 Hospital leadership creates and supports a culture of safety program throughout the hospital. 𝖯
GLD.13.1 Hospital leadership implements, monitors, and takes action to improve the program
for a culture of safety throughout the hospital.
27

--- Page 28 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
Health Professional Education
GLD.14 Health professional education, when provided within the hospital, is guided by the educational
parameters defined by the sponsoring academic program and the hospital’s leadership.
Human Subjects Research
GLD.15 Human subjects research, when provided within the hospital, is guided by laws, regulations, and
hospital leadership. 𝖯
GLD.16 Patients and families are informed about how to gain access to clinical research, clinical
investigations, or clinical trials involving human subjects. 𝖯
GLD.17 Patients and families are informed about how patients who choose to participate in clinical research,
clinical investigations, or clinical trials are protected.
GLD.18 Informed consent is obtained before a patient participates in clinical research, clinical investigations,
or clinical trials. 𝖯
GLD.19 The hospital has a committee or another way to oversee all research in the hospital involving human
subjects. 𝖯
28

--- Page 29 ---
Facility Management
and Safety (FMS)
Standards
Leadership and Planning
FMS.1 The hospital complies with relevant laws, regulations, building and fire safety codes and facility
inspection requirements.
FMS.2 The hospital develops and maintains a written program(s) describing the processes to manage risks
to patients, families, visitors, and staff. 𝖯
FMS.3 One or more qualified individuals oversee the planning and implementation of the facility
management program to reduce and control risks in the care environment.
Safety and Security
FMS.4 The hospital plans and implements a program to provide a safe physical facility through inspection
and planning to reduce risks. 𝖯
FMS.4.1 The hospital plans and implements a program to provide a secure environment for
patients, families, staff, and visitors. 𝖯
FMS.4.2 The hospital plans and budgets for upgrading or replacing key systems, buildings, or
components based on the facility inspection and in keeping with laws and regulations.
FMS.4.2.1 When planning for demolition, construction, or renovation, the
organizations conducts a pre-construction risk assessment. 𝖯
Hazardous Materials
FMS.5 The hospital has a program for the inventory, handling, storage, and use of hazardous materials and
waste. 𝖯
FMS.5.1 The hospital has a program for the control and disposal of hazardous materials and
waste. 𝖯
Disaster Preparedness
FMS.6 The hospital develops, maintains, and tests an emergency management program to respond
to emergencies and natural or other disasters that have the potential of occurring within the
community. 𝖯
Fire Safety
FMS.7 The hospital establishes and implements a program for the prevention, early detection, suppression,
abatement, and safe exit from the facility in response to fires and nonfire emergencies. 𝖯
FMS.7.1 The hospital regularly tests its fire and smoke safety program, including any devices
related to early detection and suppression, and documents the results. 𝖯
29

--- Page 30 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
FMS.7.2 The fire safety program includes limiting smoking by staff and patients to designated
non–patient care areas of the facility. 𝖯
Medical Equipment
FMS.8 The hospital establishes and implements a program for inspecting, testing, and maintaining medical
equipment and documenting the results. 𝖯
FMS.8.1 The hospital has a system in place for monitoring and acting on medical equipment
hazard notices, recalls, reportable incidents, problems, and failures. 𝖯
Utility Systems
FMS.9 The hospital establishes and implements a program to ensure that all utility systems operate
effectively and efficiently.
FMS.9.1 Utility systems are inspected, maintained, and improved.
FMS.9.2 The hospital utility systems program ensures that potable water and electrical power
are available at all times and establishes and implements alternative sources of water
and power during system disruption, contamination, or failure.
FMS.9.2.1 The hospital tests its emergency water and electrical systems and
documents the results.
FMS.9.3 Designated individuals or authorities monitor water quality regularly.
Facility Management and Safety Program Monitoring
FMS.10 The hospital collects and analyzes data from each of the facility management and safety programs
to support planning for replacing or upgrading medical equipment, technology and systems, and
reducing risks in the environment.
Staff Education
FMS.11 The hospital educates, trains, and tests all staff about their roles in providing a safe and effective
patient care facility.
FMS.11.1 Staff members are trained and knowledgeable about their roles in the hospital’s
programs for fire safety, security, hazardous materials, and emergencies.
FMS.11.2 Staff are trained to operate and to maintain medical equipment and utility systems.
30

--- Page 31 ---
Staff Qualifications
and Education (SQE)
Standards
Planning
SQE.1 Leaders of hospital departments and services define the desired education, skills, knowledge, and
other requirements of all staff members.
SQE.1.1 Each staff member’s responsibilities are defined in a current job description. 𝖯
SQE.2 Leaders of hospital departments and services develop and implement processes for recruiting,
evaluating, and appointing staff as well as other related procedures identified by the hospital.
SQE.3 The hospital uses a defined process to ensure that clinical staff knowledge and skills are consistent
with patient needs.
SQE.4 The hospital uses a defined process to ensure that nonclinical staff knowledge and skills are
consistent with hospital needs and the requirements of the position.
SQE.5 There is documented personnel information for each staff member. 𝖯
SQE.6 A staffing strategy for the hospital, developed by the leaders of hospital departments and services,
identifies the number, types, and desired qualifications of staff. 𝖯
SQE.6.1 The staffing strategy is reviewed on an ongoing basis and updated as necessary.
SQE.7 All clinical and nonclinical staff members are oriented to the hospital, the department or unit to
which they are assigned, and to their specific job responsibilities at appointment to the staff.
SQE.8 Each staff member receives ongoing in-service and other education and training to maintain or to
advance his or her skills and knowledge.
SQE.8.1 Staff members who provide patient care and other staff identified by the hospital are
trained and can demonstrate appropriate competence in resuscitative techniques.
SQE.8.2 The hospital provides a staff health and safety program that addresses staff physical and
mental health and safe working conditions. 𝖯
SQE.8.2.1 The hospital identifies staff who are at risk for exposure to and possible
transmission of vaccine-preventable diseases and implements a staff
vaccination and immunization program. 𝖯
Determining Medical Staff Membership
SQE.9 The hospital has a uniform process for gathering the credentials of those medical staff members
permitted to provide patient care without supervision. 𝖯
SQE.9.1 Medical staff members’ education, licensure/registration, and other credentials
required by law or regulation and the hospital are verified and kept current. 𝖯
31

--- Page 32 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
SQE.9.2 There is a uniform, transparent decision process for the initial appointment of medical
staff members. 𝖯
The Assignment of Medical Staff Clinical Privileges
SQE.10 The hospital has a standardized, objective, evidence-based procedure to authorize medical staff
members to admit and to treat patients and/or to provide other clinical services consistent with
their qualifications. 𝖯
Ongoing Monitoring and Evaluation of Medical Staff Members
SQE.11 The hospital uses an ongoing standardized process to evaluate the quality and safety of the patient
care provided by each medical staff member. 𝖯
Medical Staff Reappointment and Renewal of Clinical Privileges
SQE.12 At least every three years, the hospital determines, from the ongoing monitoring and evaluation of
each medical staff member, if medical staff membership and clinical privileges are to continue with
or without modification. 𝖯
Nursing Staff
SQE.13 The hospital has a uniform process to gather, to verify, and to evaluate the nursing staff’s credentials
(license, education, training, and experience). 𝖯
SQE.14 The hospital has a standardized process to identify job responsibilities and to make clinical work
assignments based on the nursing staff member’s credentials and any regulatory requirements.
SQE.14.1 The hospital has a standardized process for nursing staff participation in the hospital’s
quality improvement activities, including evaluating individual performance when
indicated.
Other Health Care Practitioners
SQE.15 The hospital has a uniform process to gather, to verify, and to evaluate other health care
practitioners’ credentials (license, education, training, and experience). 𝖯
SQE.16 The hospital has a uniform process to identify job responsibilities and to make clinical work
assignments based on other health care practitioners’ credentials and any regulatory requirements.
SQE.16.1 The hospital has a uniform process for other health care practitioners’ participation in
the hospital’s quality improvement activities.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Management of
Information (MOI)
Standards
Information Management
MOI.1 The hospital plans and designs information management processes to meet internal and external
information needs.
MOI.2 Information privacy, confidentiality, and security—including data integrity—are maintained. 𝖯
MOI.3 The hospital determines the retention time of records, data, and information. 𝖯
MOI.4 The hospital uses standardized diagnosis and procedure codes and ensures the standardized use of
approved symbols and abbreviations across the hospital.
MOI.5 The data and information needs of those in and outside the hospital are met on a timely basis in a
format that meets user expectations and with the desired frequency.
MOI.6 Records and information are protected from loss, destruction, tampering, and unauthorized access
or use. 𝖯
MOI.7 Decision makers and other staff members are educated and trained in the principles of information
use and management.
Management and Implementation of Documents
MOI.8 Written documents, including policies, procedures, and programs, are managed in a consistent and
uniform manner. 𝖯
MOI.8.1 The policies, procedures, plans, and other documents that guide consistent and
uniform clinical and nonclinical processes and practices are fully implemented. 𝖯
Medical Record
MOI.9 The hospital initiates and maintains a standardized medical record for every patient assessed or
treated and determines the record’s content, format, and location of entries. 𝖯
MOI.9.1 The medical record contains sufficient information to identify the patient (also see
IPSG.1), to support the diagnosis, to justify the treatment, and to document the
course and results of treatment.
MOI.10 The medical records of patients receiving emergency care include the time of arrival and departure,
the conclusions at termination of treatment, the patient’s condition at discharge, and follow-up care
instructions.
MOI.11 The hospital identifies those authorized to make entries in the patient medical record. 𝖯
33

--- Page 34 ---
Joint Commission international aCCreditation standards for Hospitals, 6tH edition
MOI.11.1 Every patient medical record entry identifies its author and when the entry was made
in the medical record.
MOI.11.1.1 The hospital has a process to address the proper use of the copy-and-
paste function when electronic medical records are used. 𝖯
MOI.12 As part of its monitoring and performance improvement activities, the hospital regularly assesses
patient medical record content and the completeness of patient medical records.
Information Technology in Health Care
MOI.13 Health information technology systems are assessed and tested prior to implementation within the
hospital and evaluated for quality and patient safety following implementation.
MOI.14 The hospital develops, maintains, and tests a program for response to planned and unplanned
downtime of data systems. 𝖯
34

--- Page 35 ---
Section IV:
Academic Medical
Center Hospital
Standards

--- Page 36 ---
Medical Professional
Education (MPE)
Standards
MPE.1 The hospital’s governing body and leadership of the hospital approve and monitor the participation
of the hospital in providing medical education.
MPE.2 The hospital’s clinical staff, patient population, technology, and facility are consistent with the goals
and objectives of the education program.
MPE.3 Clinical teaching staff are identified, and each staff member’s role and relationship to the academic
institution is defined.
MPE.4 The hospital understands and provides the required frequency and intensity of medical supervision
for each type and level of medical student and trainee. 𝖯
MPE.5 Medical education provided in the hospital is coordinated and managed through a defined
operational mechanism and management structure.
MPE.6 Medical students and trainees comply with all hospital policies and procedures, and all care is
provided within the quality and patient safety parameters of the hospital. 𝖯
MPE.7 Medical trainees who provide care or services within the hospital—outside of the parameters of
their academic program—are granted permission to provide those services through the hospital’s
established credentialing, privileging, job specification, or other relevant processes.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Human Subjects
Research Programs
(HRP)
Standards
HRP.1 Hospital leadership is accountable for the protection of human research subjects.
HRP.1.1 Hospital leadership complies with all regulatory and professional requirements and
provides adequate resources for effective operation of the research program.
HRP.2 Hospital leadership establishes the scope of the research program.
HRP.3 Hospital leadership establishes requirements for sponsors of research to ensure their commitment to
the conduct of ethical research. 𝖯
HRP.3.1 When one or more of the research-related duties and functions of the sponsor are
provided through an outside commercial or academic contract research organization,
the accountabilities of the outside contract research organization are clearly defined. 𝖯
HRP.4 Hospital leadership creates or contracts for a process to provide the initial and ongoing review of all
human subjects research. 𝖯
HRP.5 The hospital identifies and manages conflicts of interest with research conducted at the hospital. 𝖯
HRP.6 The hospital integrates the human subjects research program into the quality and patient safety
program of the hospital.
HRP.7 The hospital establishes and implements an informed consent process that enables patients to make
informed and voluntary decisions about participating in clinical research, clinical investigations, or
clinical trials.
HRP.7.1 The hospital informs patients and families about how to gain access to clinical
research, clinical investigations, or clinical trials and includes protections for
vulnerable populations to minimize potential coercion or undue influence. 𝖯
37